---
layout: page
title: filer
category: projects
project-repo: https://github.com/theparanoidtimes/filer
enlive-repo: https://github.com/cgrand/enlive
enlive-selectors-url: https://github.com/cgrand/enlive#selectors
ruby-method-url: https://apidock.com/rails/ActionDispatch/Assertions/SelectorAssertions/assert_select
test-html-url: https://github.com/theparanoidtimes/filer/blob/master/test/resources/test.html
permalink: /:categories/:title
---

When you do a lot of file manipulation tasks which all tend to be repetitive and
have a lot of boilerplate code it is always helpful to have most commonly used
functions stored somewhere so they can be used when needed. That is exactly what
*filer* represents - a library of various file manipulation function that strive
to be highly (re)usable.

The library is divided into namespaces that specialize in one file type, but
they can all be used in combination. There are namespaces for manipulating
directories (`dir.core`), text files (`txt.core`), XML files (`xml.core`) and
HTML files (`html.core`). Here I would like to focus only on `html.core`
namespace, but if you want to check out the others as well go to the library's
GitHub [page]({{ page.project-repo }}).

The main purpose of the HTML namespace functions is to perform structure and
content assertions upon HTML files. The need for such functions arose during the
testing of one mass mailing system. The e-mail messages that were sent to the
customers needed to be tested thoroughly by checking that every required feature
was at its place. So the best way was to pick that place from the message and
assert its contents with the expected value.

The main function, that performs the explained action, is `assert-select`. It is
fully backed by [enlive]({{ page.enlive-repo }}) library. It utilizes its
[selectors]({{ page.enlive-selectors-url }}) for document navigation. The
inspiration came from this Ruby on Rails [method]({{ page.ruby-method-url }}).

The function takes a HTML document, a selectors vector and a assertion function
which should be a predicate. HTML document can be a string, a file or *enlive*
node map. The predicate will be applied on all returned nodes and must accept
only one argument which is node map - the map that *enlive* returns. So in order
to query a particular part of the node `:tag`, `:attrs` or `:content`, the
appropriate key must be selected.

All the following examples are executed against an HTML test [file]({{ page.test-html-url }})
in the *filer* repository.

Primarily you can do assertions on multiple nodes.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:h1]
	(fn [node] (string? (-> node :content first))))
=> true
```

:content is a list so we must take the first (and only) element from it. This
can be used to perform all kinds of assertions, like check if there are `<li>`
elements without any content.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:li]
	(fn [node] (not (empty? (-> node :content)))))
=> true
```

The output is `true` so all `<li>` elements have some content. Assertions can't
only be done on node content, we can query node attributes also. Let's check if
all `<a>` elements have `href` attribute with some value.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:a]
	(fn [node] (when-let [href (-> node :attrs :href)]
                    (not= "" href))))
=> true
```

When we want to assert on some node on the specific position like 'assert on the
5th `h1` tag in the document' we can supply additional options to the
`assert-select` function.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:h1]
      (fn [node]
        (= "Paragraphs" (-> node :content first)))
      {:n 4})
=> true
```

The `:n` option is currently the only option that this function takes and
represents the position of the node in the list that *enlive* returns,
effectively the position in the document. Position numbers start from 0.

If we know the particular node we want to do assertion upon we can fully utilize
*enlive*'s node syntax to access nodes by id and/or by their hierarchical
position.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:div#top :> :header :> :h1]
      (fn [node]
        (= "HTML5 Test Page" (-> node :content first))))
=> true
```

CSS syntax is supported so we can just add `#top` on the node name to select
just the node with that id. `:>` means 'the following child node'. Read more
about selector syntax on the *enlive* [page]({{ page.enlive-selectors-url }}).

There are a few helper functions for some common cases already defined so we can
avoid writing full functions. For example for content equality assertion we can
use the `content=?` function.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:div#top :> :header :> :h1]
	(html/content=? "HTML5 Test Page"))
=> true
```

There is also a function for regex matching. For example lets check if some
node's content has only uppercase letters.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:abbr]
	(html/content-matches? #"[A-Z]+")
	{:n 0})
=> true
```

Let's take a look at some other helper functions. For asserting on node
attributes...

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html [:circle]
	(html/attributes-contain? :cx "100"))
=> true
```

For checking link target...

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html
	[:article#embedded__progress :> :footer :> :p :> :a]
	(html/link-target=? "#top"))
=> true
```

Link name...

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html
	[:article#embedded__progress :> :footer :> :p :> :a]
	(html/link-name=? "[Top]"))
=> true
```

Assertions on `img` nodes...

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html
	[:article#embedded__images :> :div :> :p :> :img]
	(html/img-src=? "http://placekitten.com/480/480"))
=> true

(html/assert-select test-html
	[:article#embedded__images :> :div :> :p :> :img]
	(html/img-src-alt=? "http://placekitten.com/480/480" "Image alt text"))
=> true
```

And special case for asserting `img` in `a` (picture as a link) tag scenario.

```clojure
(html/assert-select test-html
	[:p#img-as-link :> :a]
	(html/img-as-link=? "http://placekitten.com/480/480" "#top"))
=> true
```

These are just some of the common cases that this function can handle. It
provides enough flexibility to support all kind of assertions. For more details
check out the source code at the [repo]({{ page.project-repo }}) page. I hope
you find the library useful.
