---
layout: post
title: manifest
category: blog
black-doc-url: https://github.com/karloespiritu/BlackDoc
jekyll-url: https://jekyllrb.com/
---

Hi, I am Dejan Josifović a software craftsman situated in Belgrade, Serbia and
this is my personal part blog, part portfolio site. I mostly program in Java and
Clojure, but I have many other interests (like IoT, games, music etc.) and will put
an effort to touch every one of them here. Another way to put it is that this is
my part serious, part not so serious site. Let me explain.

The serious part will encompass my personal projects and open source contributions
presented in the as much as possible serious way. I hide my serious stuff under
the name *the paranoid times* which is my organization and the 'owner' of this
site. While I also have other projects, the ones from *the paranoid times* are
in focus here. This division is also reflected in my GitHub repos as shown in
the contact section on the left. You can see the list of my projects
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}/projects) and the list of my open source contributions
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}/contributions).

The not so serious part of the site will be my [blog]({{ site.baseurl }}/blog).
The first non serious thing is that there is no schedule for posting, I will
post when I have something to say intersected with when I have the time to
write it. The second, well, not so not serious, thing is that there is no some
kind of overall theme for the blog. I will write about everything and anything
I feel about writing, being that programming, IoT, games, music, food etc, so
stay tuned.

If you like the site check out the [source]({{ site.github.repo }}). It is written
with [Jekyll]({{ page.jekyll-url }}) and the theme is the modification of
[BlackDoc]({{ page.black-doc-url }}) theme.

Enjoy!
